GSQLi: A GAN-based Approach for Adversarial
SQL Injection Sample Generation against WAF
1st Le Minh Khan
University of Information Technology
Vietnam National University
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
20521430@gm.uit.edu.vn
2nd Hien Do Hoang
University of Information Technology
Vietnam National University
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
hiendh@uit.edu.vn
3rd Khoa Ngo-Khanh
University of Information Technology
Vietnam National University
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
khoank@uit.edu.vn
4th Phan The Duy
University of Information Technology
Vietnam National University
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
duypt@uit.edu.vn
5th Van-Hau Pham
University of Information Technology
Vietnam National University
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
haupv@uit.edu.vn
*Corresponding author
Abstract—Web application firewalls (WAFs) are critical for
detecting and blocking malicious activities, offering essential
protection for web applications. However, to defend against the
complexity of modern attacks, penetration testers must regularly
evaluate WAFs to identify potential weaknesses. A key aspect
of this process involves bypassing WAFs or attack detectors,
and utilizing machine learning (ML) significantly enhances the
effectiveness of testing. Using ML not only increases the efficiency
of identifying vulnerabilities but also reduces the need for manual
intervention. In this paper, we propose a novel method named
GSQLi to mutate payload for SQL Injection (SQLi) attacks,
one of the most popular attacks on web applications, to deceive
WAFs or detectors. By leveraging the Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN), SQLi payloads are generated by applying
several mutations on the original ones, making it challenging
for detectors to identify them as malicious. Additionally, these
mutated payloads retain their ability to exploit vulnerabilities
effectively. Experimental results prove the capability of payloads
generated by our approach to bypassing machine learning-based
attack detectors and ModSecurity, a real-world WAF. This reveals
potential vulnerabilities in current defense systems, enabling
defenders to address weaknesses more swiftly and enhance
protection against advanced attacks on web applications.
Index Terms—GAN, SQL Injection, Adversarial Sample Gen-
eration, Security Pen-Testing
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, the rise in the quantity of web applications as well
as their managed valuable data has led to increased security
risk and attacks targeting this type of application [1] [2].
Wherein, SQL injection (SQLi) is a highly prevalent web
vulnerability that can manipulate database queries by injecting
malicious code into vulnerable web applications, leading to
data breaches, unauthorized access, and severe financial and
reputational damage. More surprisingly, the time to detect a
vulnerability and launch an SQLi attack averages less than 10
seconds. Once an SQLi vulnerability is successfully exploited,
attackers can obtain all stored data, manipulate or destroy it,
and even worse, gain full control of the SQL server. Due to
its high risk and widespread occurrence, SQLi is consistently
ranked among the TOP 10 web vulnerabilities as published by
OWASP [3].
To defend against web attacks, WAFs and attack filters are
commonly used to protect against malicious attacks. However,
they remain vulnerable to many of today’s highly sophisticated
attack techniques. As a result, penetration testing of these
WAFs and filters is essential to ensure that they can effectively
detect and block such advanced threats.
Numerous studies have utilized machine learning (ML) to
enhance the efficiency and automation of penetration testing
[4] [5] [6]. Current models often use reinforcement learning
(RL) or Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to develop optimal
mutation strategies for attack payloads, primarily focusing
on generating effective mutations. Another approach involves
adversarial learning models to mutate SQLi samples; however,
these mutations often lack strategic planning and fail to
guarantee the effectiveness or integrity of the resulting attacks.
Motivated by the above issues, this paper introduces a
novel method that leverages Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) to mutate SQL injection (SQLi) payloads in ways
that effectively evade detection by defense systems. By us-
ing GANs, the approach automates the generation of highly
diverse and obfuscated attack payloads, allowing penetration
testers to reduce the manual effort required to craft new attack
vectors. Furthermore, the integration of machine learning
significantly enhances the method’s ability to bypass modern
security systems, increasing the likelihood of uncovering pre-
viously unknown vulnerabilities. This automated, intelligent
approach not only streamlines the penetration testing process
but also strengthens the ability to identify new weaknesses


---

in web applications, making it a powerful tool for enhancing
cybersecurity defenses.
The rest of this paper is constructed as follows. Section II
reviews some recent related work in the field of evaluating
WAF, especially using ML/DL methods. In Section III, our
proposed GSQLi is described in detail, followed by designed
experiments and assessment results mentioned in Section IV.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
There has been a lot of research on methods to assess
web defense systems. One notable research by Yuting Guan
et al. [5] leveraged RL techniques to mutate SQLi payloads,
using the Soft Actor-Critic algorithm (SAC)-based actor and
static and dynamic vectors for the preprocessing of original
payloads. Particularly, upon reverting to the original format,
attack payloads were modified by several mutating strategies
such as adding characters or replacing them with targets to
evade WAFs and retain the functionality and goal of the
original attack. Besides, research [4] focused on generating
XSS attack payloads utilizing the GAN model. That work
segmented parts of an XSS attack payload and classified them
according to their corresponding positions, such as the head,
body, and tail of the payloads, to create a training dataset. New
payloads were then created by combining these segments to
form complete samples with the Monte Carlo (MC) search
technique. Moreover, Zhenqing Qu et al. [6] conducted a
study related to SQLi attack payload generation using logic
transformation rules to alter the character sequences of SQL
query strings to modify the attack string format. Specifically,
they analyzed SQLi attack strings into tokens and classified
them according to their roles in the query. The authors then
applied rules known as Context-free Grammar (CFG) to these
tokens and employed the MCTS method to identify optimal
replacements to evade detection.
Though the above works were able to create attack samples
designed to deceive and bypass attack detection systems
while maintaining the attack’s effectiveness, there is room for
investigating the potential of applying GAN in creating SQLi
payloads. In addition, there is also a lack of evaluation on the
capability of real-world attacks using crafted payloads, which
are the motivations of our work.
III. GSQLI - PROPOSED METHOD
A. Overall Architecture
GSQLi leverages GAN to generate SQLi payloads that
can deceive attack detectors, with the architecture depicted
in Fig. 1. The generator generates new attack payloads by
changing mutation actions and applying them to the original
ones to avoid detection. Besides, the discriminator attempts
to evaluate whether the generated payloads are normal (un-
detected attacks) or malicious activities. Through iterative
learning, the generator improves its ability to mutate payloads
that closely resemble undetected attacks while evading the
defenses.
Initially, a payload is put into Token Parser, resulting
in corresponding Tokens and a Mutation Vector. Next, the
Mutation Vector is combined with noise to become an input of
the Generator (G) to generate appropriate Mutation Actions.
These actions are applied to the original payload by the
Payload Transformer to produce a Mutated Payload, which is
then fed into the Classifier for classification. Subsequently, the
Discriminator (D) is trained with input including the Mutation
Actions, Mutation Vector, and the label obtained from the
Classifier. This process is repeated until the Discriminator can
not detect the attack payloads mutated by the Generator.
B. Payload Preprocessing
SQLi payload is split into smaller parts called tokens. These
tokens are then categorized into characters, numbers, key-
words, operations, expressions, strings, comments, functions,
and bare words (names of tables or columns, etc.). This token
is crucial for reassembling new payload in the transformation
process.
After processing tokens, we create a Mutation Vector by
counting values from tokens followed by predefined features
shown in Table I.
C. Payload Mutation with Generative Adversarial Network
Our GSQLi framework generates SQL injection (SQLi)
payloads capable of evading web application firewalls (WAFs)
Fig. 1. GSQLi Architecture.


---

TABLE I
FEATURES OF MUTATION VECTOR
No.
Feature
Description
1
Union
The number of UNION keywords
2
Where
The number of WHERE keywords
3
Unlike
The number of UNLIKE keywords
4
Like
The number of LIKE keywords
5
Space
The number of spaces
6
TrueExp
The number of true expressions
7
FalseExp
The number of false expressions
8
TrueVal
The number of true values
9
FalseVal
The number of false values
10
And
The number of AND operations
11
Or
The number of OR operations
12
Asterisk
With (1) or without (0) any asterisk
13
Comment
The number of comments
14
NoFunc
The number of functions
15
NoBareword
The number of bare words
while maintaining their original functionality. Each payload
possesses unique characteristics, represented by its own vector.
Instead of incorporating only random noise, we utilize a
mutation vector as the additional input to the GAN model.
This approach allows the GAN to generate tailored mutation
strategies for each specific payload. To accomplish this, we
customized a GAN model based on the conditional GAN
architecture [7], adapting it specifically for our objectives of
crafting evasive SQLi attacks.
In more detail, the Generator in our model takes both a noise
vector and a mutation vector as inputs to generate specific
mutation actions. These actions serve a dual purpose, firstly
they are used to train the Discriminator and secondly to mutate
tokens to create new payloads. The Discriminator, in turn, is
trained using the mutation vector and the generated mutation
actions as inputs, with its output being a classification label
indicating whether the mutated payload is adversarial or not.
During the training process, the Generator aims to produce
samples that are classified as normal. Meanwhile, the Dis-
criminator is trained to mimic the behavior of the classifier,
distinguishing between normal (labeled as 0) and malicious
(labeled as 1) samples to improve its ability to detect adversar-
ial payloads. Using this approach, the loss functions for both
the Generator (LG) and the Discriminator (LD) are calculated
according to Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), respectively. Note that, all
generated samples are malicious and we try to make them the
same as normal ones.
LG = CE(y0, D(v, a))
(1)
LD = CE(yc, D(v, a))
(2)
where CE is the cross-entropy function, v, and a present
for Mutation Vector, and Mutation Actions, respectively. y0
is normal prediction and yc is the prediction of the classifier.
Mutation Actions, which are the output of the Generator,
present the actions of transforming tokens to generate new
payloads. We used mutation actions defined in [6] and some
customized ones that are summarised in Table II. Original
samples applying these mutated strategies can also preserve
their functionality and logic [6]. Each token is associated with
several possible mutation actions, which the Generator selects
from during the mutation process. Since a payload consists
of multiple tokens, the Generator produces a corresponding
set of actions for each token, leading to a variety of mutation
outcomes.
D. Payload Transformer
This component is responsible for transferring original pay-
loads to new payloads based on the mutated actions generated
by the Generator. Particularly, the extracted tokens from the
Token Parser have corresponding mutation actions, then the
Payload Transformer generates the new payload following
these instructions.
E. Attack Classifier
The Attack Classifier is a component to label the mutated
samples for the Discriminator. Note that, all generated samples
are SQLi attack samples. However, using a classifier that has
the knowledge to identify normal and malicious payloads can
help train GAN models more efficiently. Mutated samples that
can deceive the classifier can also deceive the Discriminator.
Therefore, the GAN model converges better because the loss
value is optimal.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION
A. Environmental setup
Our experiments are deployed on a Ubuntu v22.04 machine
with 6 CPU cores, 32GB RAM, installed Python v3.10, and
Tensorflow v2.16.1. To implement the Token Parser, we utilize
the Libinjection [8]. This library parses SQLi payloads into
tokens, which are then used to generate mutation vectors and
create inputs for the Payload Transformer. Besides, the GAN
model is built with a Generator and a Discriminator using
DL, consisting of multiple neural layers shown in Table III.
Notations n, v, and a present for the size of Noise, Mutation
Vector, and Mutation Actions, respectively. Additionally, the
Attack Classifier is constructed using a CNN model. The
payload is first transformed into a sequence of integers, which
are then passed through an embedding layer to generate a
vector representation. This resulting embedding vector serves
as the input to the CNN model.
B. Datasets
We utilize two datasets for our experiments: the HttpParams
dataset [9] and the SSHS dataset [10] from the Kaggle
repository. Since our paper focuses on SQL injection (SQLi)
attacks, we use normal and SQLi payloads. In both datasets,
we selected SQLi payloads shorter than 100 characters due to
limitations in the Libinjection library. The distribution of these
payloads is presented in Table IV. Additionally, we use the
HttpParam dataset to train the GAN model and both datasets
for evaluation.
Additionally, payloads from the HttpParams dataset with
lengths exceeding 100 characters are utilized to train the
classifier model. To process long payloads, we can split them


---

TABLE II
MUTATION METHODS AND EXAMPLES
Mutation Method
Example
Case Swapping
UNION →uNIoN
Inline Comment
UNION
SELECT
→
/*!UNION*/
/*!SELECT*/
,
UNION
→
*!50000UNION*/’
Where Injection
WHERE id=2 →WHERE TRUE and id=2 , WHERE id=2 →WHERE
1<>1 or id=2
Whitespace Swapping
OR 1 = 1 →OR/**123abc**/1/**123abc**/=/**123abc**/1
Logical Operators Swapping
and TRUE →&& TRUE , OR 1=2 →|| 1=2
Compare Operators Swapping
1=2 →1 LIKE 2 , 1!=2 →1 UN LIKE 2 , 1!=1 →1 <> 2
Number Encoding
10=1 →0xA=0x1
String Encoding
WHERE username = ”admin” →WHERE username = 0x61646D696E
Logic Constant
TRUE →1=1 , TRUE →1!=2 OR 2!=2 OR 1=3 , FALSE →1!=2 AND
2!=2 AND 1=3
TABLE III
LAYERS OF GENERATOR AND DISCRIMINATOR
Generator
Discriminator
Layer
Output Shape
Layer
Output Shape
Input
(None, n)
Input
(None, v)
Input
(None, v)
Input
(None, a)
Concatenate
(None, n + v)
Concatenate
(None, v + a)
Dense
(None, 512)
Dense
(None, 256)
Normalization
(None, 512)
Normalization
(None, 256)
Dense
(None, 256)
Dense
(None, 128)
Normalization
(None, 256)
Normalization
(None, 128)
Dense
(None, 128)
Dense
(None, 64)
Normalization
(None, 128)
Normalization
(None, 64)
Dense
(None, a)
Dense
(None, 2)
TABLE IV
THE SAMPLE DISTRIBUTION OF THE TWO DATASETS
Dataset
No. Normal samples
No. SQLi samples
HttpParams
19,304
5,557
SSHS
19,573
6,217
into segments for tokenization, and then tokened segments are
reassembled for mutation. This model is then employed to
classify the mutated SQLi payloads effectively.
C. Evaluation metrics and scenarios
1) Metrics: We use TPR (True Positive Rate) and FNR
(False Negative Rate) metrics to evaluate the deception ability
of GSQLi on detectors. TPR (Eq. (3)) is the ratio of accurately
detected malicious payloads to the total malicious ones. FNR
(Eq. (4)) presents the ratio of undetected malicious payloads
to the total malicious ones.
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(3)
FNR =
FN
FN + TP
(4)
2) Scenarios: To evaluate the performance of GSQLi, we
trained the GAN model using the HttpParams dataset and
conducted experiments across three different scenarios.
1) Scenario 1: The objective of this scenario was to test
GSQLi’s capacity to produce a large number of unique
mutated payloads from the original dataset. Starting with
5,557 original samples from the HttpParams dataset, we
introduced random noise to generate a diverse set of
mutant payloads, assessing the model’s ability to create
distinct variations from the initial inputs.
2) Scenario 2: In this scenario, we generated mutated
samples from both datasets and evaluated them against
three DL-based classifiers: RNN, GRU, and BiLSTM.
The performance was measured using TPR and FNR
metrics. The goal was to assess the ability of the mutated
payloads to deceive these ML-based classifiers and to
demonstrate whether the model can generalize to unseen
payloads not present in the training set. Each test was
repeated five times for every input, and the average
results were taken to ensure the stability and reliability
of the model’s performance.
3) Scenario 3: In the third scenario, we use the mutated
payloads generated in Scenario 2 and tested them against
ModSecurity installed the OWASP rule set. The goal
was to evaluate the evasion capabilities of these mutated
payloads in bypassing real-world WAFs.
D. Evaluation results
1) Scenario 1: GSQLi is capable of generating a signifi-
cantly larger volume of new samples compared to the original
dataset. A comparison between the original samples, input
noise, and the newly generated payloads is illustrated in Fig. 2.
Rather than focusing on a single optimal action for each
payload, GSQLi generates a combination of optimal actions.
This approach allows multiple Mutation Actions to be applied
to a single original payload, resulting in a variety of mutated
payloads.
2) Scenario 2: The results in the Table V highlight the
effectiveness of our method in generating mutated payloads
that can deceive ML-based classifiers. While the original sam-
ples show near-perfect detection rates across all models, the
mutated samples reveal a noticeable decline in True Positive
Rates (TPR) and an increase in False Negative Rates (FNR),
indicating that the mutated payloads are more challenging
for the classifiers to detect. This is especially evident on the
SSHS dataset, where the TPR drops significantly to 87.5%
with RNN, 88.9% with GRU, and 88.3% with BiLSTM, with
corresponding FNRs increasing to 12.5%, 11.1%, and 11.7%,


---

TABLE V
TPR AND FNR (%) OF ML-BASED CLASSIFIERS ON ORIGINAL AND MUTATED PAYLOADS
Dataset
Original Samples
Mutated Samples
Http Params
SSHS
Http Params
SSHS
Metrics
TPR FNR
TPR FNR
TPR FNR
TPR FNR
RNN
99.95 0.05
97.54 2.46
99.4 0.6
87.5 12.5
GRU
99.95 0.05
99.87 0.13
99.83 0.17
88.9 11.1
BiLSTM
99.95 0.05
99.69 0.31
99.87 0.13
88.3 11.7
Fig. 2.
The number of unique mutated payloads generated from random
noises.
respectively. These findings demonstrate that our method suc-
cessfully generates new patterns that effectively evade detec-
tion by ML-based firewalls, particularly excelling in fooling
classifiers on more complex datasets like SSHS.
3) Scenario 3: The experimental results, shown in Table
VI, demonstrate the evasion capabilities of GSQLi-generated
mutated payloads when tested against ModSecurity, a widely
used WAF. The FNR values, 0.19% for the HttpParams dataset
and 2.3% for the SSHS dataset indicate that a significant
number of mutated payloads can bypass ModSecurity without
detection. These results emphasize the effectiveness of this
method in fooling real-world WAFs, showing that the mutated
payloads successfully evade detection while maintaining attack
functionality. This highlights GSQLi’s potential as a valuable
tool for pen-testers to identify weaknesses in WAFs.
E. Comparison with other related works
Our GSQLi focuses on generating SQL injection (SQLi)
attack payloads using a customized GAN, setting it apart
from other approaches in both scope and effectiveness. As
can be seen in Table VII, while Zhenqing and Yuting also
target SQLi, they rely on CFG, MCTS, and SAC, which offer
different mechanisms for attack generation. In comparison to
Zhang and Ankur, who explore Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)
TABLE VI
FNR (%) OF MODSECURITY ON THE MUTATED PAYLOADS
Dataset
HttpParams
SSHS
ModSecurity
0.19
2.3
attacks, our method specifically addresses SQLi, providing
more targeted results. Unlike Chowdhary, whose approach
using GAN lacks payload functionality checks, our model
ensures that generated payloads are functional. Moreover, our
work, like Qu and Guan’s, is tested in both ML-based and real-
world WAF environments, making it more comprehensive and
practical for real-world applications, while also maintaining
functionality checks to ensure high-quality attacks.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper introduces a novel approach for generating
SQLi attack payloads that can produce a large variety of
new, evasive payloads while retaining their ability to exploit
vulnerabilities. The proposed method uses GAN and pre-
defined mutated actions to craft these payloads, enabling pen-
testers to evade detection systems such as WAFs and ML-
based detectors. Experimental testing of the generated SQLi
payloads was conducted, demonstrating the ability of the
proposed approach to bypass both ML-based classifiers and
real-world WAFs, such as ModSecurity. The results not only
highlight the effectiveness of this attack generation method
but also underscore its potential applications in penetration
testing and security evaluation. In future work, we extend
the model to generate adversarial payloads for other types of
web-based attacks, such as Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) and
Remote Code Execution (RCE), etc. Additionally, integrating
reinforcement learning with GANs could further optimize the
payload generation process by adapting to real-time defenses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded by University of Information Tech-
nology - Vietnam National University HoChiMinh City under
grant number of D1-2024-60.
REFERENCES
[1] Radware, “2024 Global Threat Analysis Report Executive Summary:
Analysis of the most significant cybersecurity events and trends of 2023,”
Tech. Rep., 2024.
[2] M. Tremante, S. Zejnilovic, and C. Newcomb, “Application Security
report: 2024 update,” CloudFlare, Tech. Rep., 2024.
[3] OWASP, “OWASP Top Ten,” https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/,
2024.
[4] A. Chowdhary, K. Jha, and M. Zhao, “Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN)-Based Autonomous Penetration Testing for Web Applications,”
Sensors, vol. 23, no. 18, p. 8014, 2023.
[5] Y. Guan, J. He, T. Li, H. Zhao, and B. Ma, “SSQLi: A Black-Box
Adversarial Attack Method for SQL Injection Based on Reinforcement
Learning,” Future Internet, vol. 15, no. 4, p. 133, 2023.
[6] Z. Qu, X. Ling, T. Wang, X. Chen, S. Ji, and C. Wu, “AdvSQLi:
Generating Adversarial SQL Injections against Real-world WAF-as-a-
service,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
vol. 19, pp. 2623 – 2638, 2024.


---

TABLE VII
COMPARISON WITH OTHER WORKS
Work
Attack Type
Model
Architecture
Payload
Functionality Check
Deception
Environment
Zhenqing Qu [6]
SQLi
CFG, MCTS
Yes
ML-based and
Real-world WAFs
Yuting Guan [5]
SQLi
SAC (RL)
Yes
ML-based and
Real-world WAFs
Zhang [11]
XSS
GAN, MCTS
Yes
ML-based WAFs
Ankur
Chowdhary [4]
XSS
Vanilla GAN
No
ML-based and
Real-world WAFs
Ours
SQLi
Customized GAN
Yes
ML-based and
Real-world WAFs
[7] M. Mirza and S. Osindero, “Conditional generative adversarial nets,”
2014. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1784
[8] N. Galbreath, “libinjection: The SQL/SQLi detection library,” 2012.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/libinjection/libinjection
[9] Morzeux,
“HttpParams
Dataset,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/Morzeux/HttpParamsDataset
[10] S. S. H. Shah, “SQL Injection Dataset,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/syedsaqlainhussain/sql-injection-dataset
[11] X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, S. Pei, J. Zhuge, and J. Chen, “Adversarial Examples
Detection for XSS Attacks Based on Generative Adversarial Networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 10 989–10 996, 2020.
